# Analyzing NYPD Arrest Data: Trends, Patterns, and Predictive Modeling for Public Safety

The New York City Police Department (NYPD) arrests dataset contains a wealth of information on arrests made in the city. Throughout this study, the dataset was analyzed to uncover trends and patterns to understand the nature of violations, distribution of the arrests, and the demographics of the arrested individuals. With the help of Python, Apache Spark, Microsoft SQL Server, and Tableau, we were able to preprocess the dataset for analysis and visualize the data to spot trends and key findings such as the demographics of the arrests, distribution of the arrests among boroughs, the most frequent offenses and their level. Our findings show that some boroughs have a higher rate of arrests compared to others. Moreover, certain crimes, such as assaults and thefts, are more common than others. Also, we observed that the majority of the arrested perpetrators are more likely to be black adult males. One of the key highlights in our study is the development of a predictive model to identify unclassified arrests in terms of the level of offense that took place. By identifying patterns in criminal activity and defining the characteristics of the offenders, we can develop strategies and approaches to reduce crime and improve public safety. This can include sending extra police units to areas that witness high criminal activity, developing prevention programs for vulnerable groups, and offering educational and career opportunities to address the root causes of crime. Additionally, our analysis emphasizes the need for transparency in police activity and the necessity to ensure that all individuals are treated fairly within the criminal justice system.

_Check out the Jupyter Notebook code and the project report for more information_

